Explosive Alchemy? Mod idea:
(Particle Physics???)

-Should be late in the game.
-Start with directed beams, explosions come as a consequence of more powerful beams? Concentrated?

Tiered progression:

Start by capturing some form of power from the natural world (beams in the sky)
Particle Lightning Rod?
Direct those beams for power? Effects?
Later on, you can progress to making your own power (concentrated beams - explosions)
Beams can collide - makes an explosion, biproduct of other beams??? Useful???? Particles with different effects.


Particles can be changed to perform various effects.
Can have groups of particles for multiple effects.
You can convert any particle to any other, but it should be difficult, especially for stronger effects.
Particles are found within the world, at certain structures. Different structures have particles with varying effects. (Particle Dowsing Rods? A lens to  view them through (with XRAY powers?))

Example:

A particle that has a heat effect. You need to provide something to give it power to heat. Could provide a system for looping around furnaces to power them - needs charging.
Potential optimisations for calculations - pre-calculate the route a particle would take and then just display where it would be at x time.

Effects:
A system of opposites? Maybe polarities?

Heat/Cold
Push/Pull
Life/Death???Hydration/Drying???Accelerate/Decelerate???
Light/Dark?Colour/Lack of?

Plan:

Particles have a frequency and a polarity;
A graph exists for every particle type, wherein a frequenecy and polarity at verious values cause an effect based on that type.
Waves introduce a third property of incoherence. Wherein how well the individual particles within the beam align with the beam type, denotes how big or small the beam appears
on the graph.
A smaller, more concentrated beam, allows for more powerful applications of the effects on the graph, however, a less concentrated beam, allows for one which could potentially
contain multiple effects, albeit with a lesser strength.
How much of the beam is within the area of the effect denotes the strength of said effect; 100% inside equals the maximum strength - easily weighted.
Powerful effects are likely to be small and difficult to reach within the graph, meaning it is possible to trigger them with a weakened effect, but more concentrated beams are 
needed to use them effectively.
Weaker effects are larger and more close to the centre of the graph, whereas more powerful effects are smaller and towards the edges.
Manipulating the state of a particle (its frequency and polarity) can be done using machinery (as of yet undecided) which at first, is innacurate and limited in how far it can
manipulate the state of a particle, therefore making more powerful effects unobtainable/very difficult.
Potential later machinery could combine beams (align them on the same path, but they remain separate), which may interact with one another whenever passing through lenses.